This VA Patient Safety Center of Inquiry (PSCI) focuses on measurement
of patient safety. Prior work by the Center for Innovations in Quality,
Effectiveness and Safety (iQuEST) has been conducted to develop a series
of Safer Dx framework guided rules-based *e-triggers* to facilitate the
measurement of diagnostic errors in primary care and emergency
department settings. These e-triggers enabled the measurement of
diagnostic safety issues via electronic health record data. The
resulting set of Safer Dx e-triggers have undergone extensive testing
and refinement. This PSCI endeavor aims to implement these e-triggers
across VA facilities at a nation level. However, VA sites' practices and
data may vary so these Safer Dx e-triggers may require customization to
optimize their performance and effectiveness when implemented into
clinical practice at individual sites.

This proposal will outline the "Diagnosis Improvement Safety Center"
(DISCovery) plan to **implement** these Safer Dx e-triggers into
practice at 3 selected VA centers. The initial phase will involve a
pilot in the primary care setting to test a Safer Dx e-trigger change
package called **Safer Dx ENGAGE**. This change packet is intended to
provide the guidance and support for the implementation of the
e-triggers to each of the sites. The Safer Dx ENGAGE change packet
involves utilizing the recommendations from the Measure Dx framework and
leveraging the knowledge gained in the previous work to inform and guide
the sites with: 1) the establishing of the necessary project structure
and resources at each site, 2) the process to identify the appropriate
e-trigger(s) needed for a site and the associated customization process,
3) the roll out and testing of the e-triggers into practice and 4) the
measurement of their use and effectiveness at the sites.

The project comprises of two main aims. Aim 1involves developing and
testing the Safer Dx ENGAGE change package and Aim 2 is the assessment
of the implementation and use of the triggers. Broadly, the process will
follow the *Measure Dx* Resource.[^1]

**AIM1: Develop and pilot test a Safer Dx ENGAGE change package to
provide VA facilities guidance on how to implement e-triggers in primary
care**

# Prepare

Like many distributed organizations, the VA Medical centers are varied
in their structure and organization, their patient populations, and
their operational goals. As such there may be a need for some changes or
additions to current practices at participating centers to prepare for
the implementation of the Safer Dx e-triggers. Implementation of new
measurement strategies and change approaches must account for
organizational and other non-technical issues, or electronic tools will
not lead to improvements.[^2]

Successful projects depend on buy in from the user community of an
organization and a structured change management process outlined in the
Safer Dx ENGAGE change package has been proposed to facilitate this.
Therefore, the initial step will be to identify those interested and
invested in the project goals. These individuals may have different
existing interests or roles within the organization, but they will need
to come together to form a project team. The Safer Dx team and the
project champion will engage leadership and other stakeholders
throughout the organization, raise awareness and promote the projects
goals and tasks in order to achieve buy-in from the wider stakeholder
community. At the initiation of the project the sites need to identify
individuals who will work as an engaged Safer Dx team with dedicated
hours available towards the change package. This team at a minimum
should contain the following roles:

[Project Team]{.ul}

-   Project Champion -- will be the project sponsor and engage with
    senior management to report progress and provide support and
    strategies to the project team to address barriers the project may
    encounter

-   Project Manager -- to provide support for core project and
    administrative functions as well as project reporting to the Project
    Champion

-   Safety Officer -- to ensure the e-triggers and their implementation
    align with organizational patient safety and quality standards and
    goals

-   Chart Reviewer -- ideally with clinical training to be able to
    review and verify the accuracy and completeness of the data
    generated by the e-triggers

-   Data manager/System administrator/programmers -- will facilitate
    access to the CDW and other organizational data resources, as well
    as monitor and advise on the technical aspects of the development
    and implementation of the e-triggers. In addition, they will liaise
    with clinical experts as part the e-trigger review activities

-   Developers -- familiar with working with databases and other data
    systems both for information retrieval tasks and customization tasks
    for the e-trigger as needed

The development, testing and implementation of the e-triggers is an
iterative process and so it is essential for the project team work
together in an integrated and cohesive way. The process may involve
multiple revisions to the e-trigger to ensure the project meets common
organizational patient safety goals and aligns to the identified
clinical objectives.

The Safer Dx ENGAGE change package contains multiple steps. The first
involves identifying key individuals within the organization, who may be
involved with this project both in terms of providing guidance and in
the development of content for the e-triggers. The following steps
involve creation of various functional groups:

**TASK: Step1 - Convene an expert panel**

-   6-8 individuals to provide expert advice and guidance

-   Should represent the areas of patient safety, diagnostic error,
    quality improvement, clinical leadership, and informatics

-   Will identify individuals to participate in 3 stakeholder groups for
    the development of content

**TASK: Step 2 - Convene stakeholder groups for development of content**

Key individuals from specific disciplines should be engaged and enrolled
into 3 groups to guide and inform the development of content. Each group
should consist of 6-7 key individuals with appropriate experience and
knowledge of their field to inform the e-trigger content development:

1.  **Data and Informatics Group** -- Chief Information Officer, Chief
    Medical Information Officer, Chief Nursing Information Officer, data
    analysts, CDW administrators

2.  **Quality and Safety Group**- Patient safety managers, Quality
    managers, Risk managers

3.  **Clinical Operations Group** -Chief Medical Directors, Patient
    Experience Innovation leaders, clinical leaders, and clinicians

# Self-Assessment

Each DISCovery site will determine its priorities and how e-triggers
could be employed to have the most impact. The *Measure Dx Checklist*
will provide a framework for this step.[^3] Sites will select one or
more measurement strategies, and they will ensure that sufficient
resources are available for diagnostic safety measurement activities.
Sites must ensure sufficient personnel and technical resources are
available and enrolled on the project to:

I.  Collect information about diagnostic safety

II. Respond effectively when learning opportunities are discovered

To aid participating facilities in assessing how ready their
organization is to initiate the project, the following checklist may
help. This checklist will aid the Safer Dx project team to identify
where further efforts may be required to prepare for initiation of the
project.

The Safer Dx project team can check the following items as they develop
their plan for measurement.

## Organizational Readiness Checklist

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Clear objectives**             | **RESULTS**                      |
|                                  |                                  |
| -   The diagnostic safety team   | None **-** few items             |
|     has identified specific      | checked**:** Start small.        |
|     motivations and expected     | Consider using one strategy in a |
|     outcomes of measurement      | limited capacity (e.g., pilot    |
|     activities that foster       | test on a single unit)           |
|     nonpunitive learning and     |                                  |
|     improvement                  |                                  |
+==================================+==================================+
| **Leadership engagement**        |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
| -   Leaders at appropriate level |                                  |
|     of the organization have     |                                  |
|     committed support t learning |                                  |
|     from diagnostic safety       |                                  |
|     events.                      |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Designated Team**              | Several items checked: Consider  |
|                                  | using one or more of the         |
| -   One or more team members are | strategies below or focus on     |
|     able and willing to commit   | broad implementation of a single |
|     time and effort to lead a    | measurement strategy             |
|     diagnostic safety            |                                  |
|     measurement and improvement  |                                  |
|     program                      |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
| -   Team members have support    |                                  |
|     from others at your          |                                  |
|     organization who are also    |                                  |
|     willing to learn in pursuit  |                                  |
|     of diagnostic excellence.    |                                  |
|     These could include nursing  |                                  |
|     staff,                       |                                  |
|     physicians/clinicians, risk  |                                  |
|     management/legal staff,      |                                  |
|     representatives of           |                                  |
|     diagnostic specialties (if   |                                  |
|     available) and information   |                                  |
|     technology and informatics   |                                  |
|     staff (if available)         |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Safety culture**               | Most/all items checked: You seem |
|                                  | well positioned to use multiple  |
| -   Your organization            | measurement strategies from the  |
|     demonstrates commitment to   | list below                       |
|     safety culture (e.g., by     |                                  |
|     conducting periodic surveys  |                                  |
|     of safety culture,           |                                  |
|     reviewing, and learning from |                                  |
|     the findings, and            |                                  |
|     implementing strategies to   |                                  |
|     address findings).           |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
| -   Your organization has a      |                                  |
|     mechanism to share learning  |                                  |
|     from case review/analysis    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Quality and safety resources   |                                  |
| and infrastructure**             |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
| 1.  Patient safety and quality   |                                  |
|     infrastructure is available  |                                  |
|     to support your efforts.     |                                  |
|     This could include basic     |                                  |
|     safety measurement and       |                                  |
|     reporting infrastructure or  |                                  |
|     resources that support more  |                                  |
|     advanced data gathering and  |                                  |
|     analysis                     |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Participating VA facilities may use the strategy of leveraging the
capabilities of their EHRs to inform their measurement of diagnostic
safety. This approach could also be augmented with the strategy of
soliciting information about diagnostic safety directly from clinicians.

Additionally, participating facilities could ask the following
questions:

1.  Does your HCO have an EHR data warehouse or equivalent system for
    EHR queries?

2.  Is there a person who can access the data warehouse and can support
    the team with EHR queries?

3.  Is there a team member who understands clinical data
    quality/validation?

4.  Does the HCO have a coordinated process for requesting EHR data,
    running queries, and generating reports?

# Strategies (ENGAGE Section 1)

The PSCI iQuEST team will provide guidance on how to implement the Safer
Dx ENGAGE change package.

**TASK: Step 2 continued: Conduct interviews to help develop package
content**

A series of interviews will be conducted \[ by the PSCI iQuEST team? \]
with members of the three stakeholder groups with questions guided by
the eight-dimensional sociotechnical model^6^. Interviews with members
of the 3 stakeholder groups will be conducted with a snowball sampling
approach until qualitative saturation of themes is achieved. The data
will be analyzed using established qualitative techniques to identify
patterns related to barriers and facilitators of diagnostic safety
awareness and measurement. These findings will be communicated to the
facility SaferDx Project Team at the site. In addition, the findings
will be used to develop guidance on how the facility can integrate the
e-triggers into their safety measurement and learning systems. into the
change management process.

**TASK: Step 3: Safer Dx ENGAGE content development**

As part of the support and guidance for developing the e-triggers the
PSCI iQuEST team will host the following:

1.  General meetings -- to present the SaferDx ENGAGE change package,
    raise awareness of diagnostic risk via measurement and identifying
    areas needing improvement for the facility

2.  Didactic-style technical sessions for programmers and data managers
    -- the SQL query code will be shared, along with any relevant Python
    scripts and pseudocode documentation that provides human-readable
    description outlining the code steps to enable local technical teams
    to implement and support the e-triggers

3.  Clinical interpretation sessions -- guidance on to identifying key
    clinical target data and then translating this into the e-trigger
    SQL codes. These sessions will allow local teams how to determine
    relevant inclusion and exclusion criteria for the queries specific
    to the own data.

4.  Office hour sessions -- to enable connecting with the PSCI iQuEST
    team for high-throughput question/answers and email responses. [^4]

Each DISCovery site should decide who within the organization is
ultimately going to receive the data, meaning who is going to take
action based on it.[^5] This will aid understanding the format in which
recipients wish to receive the data generated, as well as ensuring all
the data elements needed by recipients will be retrieved by the
e-trigger code.

See also: VA's *Communication Of Test Results* *Toolkit*.

# Review cases (ENGAGE Section 2)

An important step in the development of the e-triggers is ensuring its
accuracy and clinical relevance. This is achieved by the verification of
the output data generated by the e-trigger. This is field testing of the
e-trigger's accuracy is multistep process where the retrieved data are
systematically reviewed by clinically trained staff as chart reviewers,
amendments if necessary are made, and then the new version e-trigger's
output data is again reviewed by chart reviewers.

-   These chart review processes will identify data quality and
    completeness issues of the e-trigger results. Chart reviewers may
    confer with the members of the Stakeholder Group 1(clinical leaders
    and clinicians) to determine whether the e-trigger meets the project
    and organizational goals or whether changes to the e-trigger are
    needed.

-   This information will provide feedback to the data
    analysts/programmers responsible for developing the e-trigger so
    that they can incorporate changes to the SQL code. Clinical
    stakeholders may suggest changes to the inclusion and exclusion
    criteria to the developers, who will revise the e-trigger code

-   The new revised e-trigger will be run and the same process of chart
    review to check for accuracy and clinical relevance will be repeated
    and any changes recommended will be made to the e-trigger. This
    process will be repeated until the accuracy and clinical relevance
    reach or exceed the agreed threshold.

-   Once the e-trigger has been optimized and clinicians give
    confirmation of its accuracy to retrieve data identifying
    opportunities for diagnostic safety improvements. This actionable
    information will be communicated to Group2 personnel (Quality and
    safety personnel), who will need to become knowledgeable on how to
    operationalize it.

This e-trigger optimization process can be an iterative and
time-consuming but is necessary to ensure the e-trigger achieves the
desired levels of accuracy and clinical relevance. Adequate time should
be allocated in the local implementation timeline and project plan to
accommodate for this. Individual sites will determine how many cases
they have the capacity to review as part of their validation review
process.

The PSCI iQuEST team have performed this process in other VAMCs, and the
accuracy or clinical relevance of e-triggers varies from site to site.
As outlined earlier, the DISCovery sites will decide *who* will review
cases, the chart review members of the Safer Dx project team.
Additionally, the data managers and programmers need to be familiar with
individual reviewers, as well as the means to send cases for review. It
is therefore essential to a smooth e-trigger validation process that
these members of the team communicate and work together in a cohesive
and integrated way. Lastly, the *Revised Safer Dx Instrument*[^6] will
be central to determining the presence/absence of missed opportunities
for diagnosis.

# Assess implementation (ENGAGE Sections 3-4)

**Data Dissemination and Support**

The results retrieved from the e-trigger may be in a format that is not
conducive to interpretation by personnel from diverse backgrounds. To
maximize utilization of the results obtained, this stage of the project
will focus on improving user interfaces of the tools used to display the
data Engagement with the Informatics personnel will support the efforts
to operationalize the dissemination of the e-trigger results.
Participants will analyze and communicate the retrieved data by way of
graphs, reports, interactive dashboards with drill down capabilities and
as well as other enhanced data visualization mechanisms.

In addition to data display of the results obtained, the Informatics
group will support the sustainability of the e-triggers by being closely
involved in the enhancement of the queries. Participants will work on
standardized data definitions, analytic approaches, and methods to
display and communicate the results retrieved by the e-triggers. This
documentation process for the e-trigger queries and other associated
technical requirements will enable future enhancements as necessitated
by changes in the organizational operations.

**Developing Strategies to Learn from the Project**

DISCovery sites will reflect on the of the co-design change package
process undertaken with iQuEST team. Site stakeholders should review and
determine how the process was used for (1) analysis, (2) feedback, and
(3) learning. Project completion/debriefing meetings may be held to
gather feedback from stakeholders, primarily Group3 Clinical leaders,
and clinicians, but also from the wider stakeholder community. In other
words, was *Safer Dx ENGAGE* appropriate for the task, given the
interviews we did at your facility to develop it?

The end result of this step is to deliver what *other VAMCs* may need to
know, including:

I.  Best practices to create and improve metrics for diagnostic safety

II. Strategies -- to determine the best approach to leverage the
    organization resources for the identifying opportunities for
    diagnostic improvements

III. Action steps -- guide of key steps for the development, testing and
     deployment of the e-triggers to enable local developers and
     stakeholders to reproduce the process

IV. Software -- ensure the technology resources are adequate and
    available to meet the needs of the project

V.  Documentation --full documentation of the SQL queries behind the
    e-triggers and other relevant technical matters and the findings
    from the Stakeholder groups will be made. Additionally, any
    learnings made about best practices or improved processes or
    regulatory requirements that might be useful feedback will be
    documented and provided to the site project team and stakeholders.

VI. E-trigger performance statistics for VA's Centralized Phenomics
    Resource[^7]

The aim of this step is to recommend ways that users can choose a
diagnostic safety target considering organization priorities, available
resources, and availability of data relevant to the team's goal to
enable similar implementation of such programs at other VA
organizations.

[^1]: Bradford A, Singh H. Measure Dx: A Resource To Identify, Analyze,
    and Learn From Diagnostic Safety Events. AHRQ Publication 22-0030.
    May 2022.

[^2]: Sittig DF, Singh H. A new sociotechnical model for studying health
    information technology in complex adaptive healthcare systems.
    *Quality and Safety in Health Care*. 2010;19(Suppl 3):i68--i74.

[^3]: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Measure Dx: A Resource
    to Identify, Analyze and Learn From Diagnostic Safety Events

[^4]: Zimolzak AJ, Singh H, Murphy DR, *et al*. Translating electronic
    health record-based patient safety algorithms from research to
    clinical practice at multiple sites. *BMJ Heal Care Informatics*.
    2022;29(1):e100565.

[^5]: Meyer AND, Upadhyay DK, Collins CA, Fitzpatrick MH, Kobylinski M,
    Bansal AB, Torretti D, Singh H. A program to provide clinicians with
    feedback on their diagnostic performance in a learning health
    system. *Jt Comm J Qual Saf* 2021;47:120--26

    ^6^Sittig DF, Singh H. A new sociotechnical model for studying
    health information technology in complex adaptive healthcare
    systems. Qual Saf Health Care. 2010 Oct;19 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):i68-74.
    doi: 10.1136/qshc.2010.042085. PMID: 20959322; PMCID: PMC3120130.

[^6]: ^7^ Singh H, Khanna A, Spitzmueller C, Meyer AND. Recommendations
    for using the Revised Safer Dx Instrument to help measure and
    improve diagnostic safety. *Diagnosis (Berl)*. 2019 Nov
    26;6(4):315--23.

[^7]: ^8^ Honerlaw J, Ho YL, Fontin F, *et al*. Development of the
    Centralized Interactive Phenomics Resource (CIPHER) Standard for
    Electronic Health Data-Based Phenomics Knowledgebase. *MedRxiv*.
    Published online 2022:2022.09.12.22279792.
