# (6) Assessment: Analysis of e-trigger implementation

## Putting knowledge obtained into action

The results retrieved from the e-trigger may be in a format that is not
conducive to interpretation by personnel from diverse backgrounds. To
maximize utilization of the results obtained, this stage of the project
will focus on improving user interfaces of the tools used to display the
data. Engagement with informatics personnel will help disseminate the
e-trigger results. Participants will analyze and communicate the
retrieved data by way of graphs, reports, interactive dashboards with
drill-down capabilities, and other enhanced data visualization
mechanisms.

In addition to developing visualization tools for displaying the
results, informatics personnel in the stakeholder team will support the
sustainability of the e-triggers by being closely involved with the
enhancement of the queries. Front-line users will give feedback to data
personnel, which will inform standardized data definitions, analytical
approaches, and methods to display and communicate the e-trigger
results. This documentation process for the e-trigger queries and other
associated technical requirements will enable future enhancements as
necessitated by changes in organizational operations.

## Developing Strategies to Learn from the Triggers

Site stakeholders should review and determine how the triggers were used
for (1) analysis, (2) feedback, and (3) learning. Project
completion/debriefing meetings may be held to gather feedback from
clinical leaders, clinicians, and the wider stakeholder team. This step
aims to recommend ways that users can choose a diagnostic safety target
considering organizational priorities, available resources, and
availability of data relevant to the team's goal.

# Addendum: Implementing elsewhere

What if you are a future user of *Safer Dx EnGAGE* who wants to
implement e-triggers in a VA, but *using Cerner?* Or what if you
happened upon this resource but don't work within VA?

This section will be analogous with a prior seven-step process about
electronic trigger tools for diagnostic safety.[^8]

[^1]: Bradford A, Singh H. Measure Dx: A Resource To Identify, Analyze,
    and Learn From Diagnostic Safety Events. AHRQ Publication 22-0030.
    May 2022.

[^2]: Sittig DF, Singh H. A new sociotechnical model for studying health
    information technology in complex adaptive healthcare systems.
    *Quality and Safety in Health Care*. 2010;19(Suppl 3):i68--i74.

[^3]: To be included in the final *Safer Dx EnGAGE* Resource as an
    appendix

[^4]: Bradford A, Singh H. Measure Dx: A Resource To Identify, Analyze,
    and Learn From Diagnostic Safety Events. AHRQ Publication 22-0030.
    May 2022.

[^5]: Meyer AND, Upadhyay DK, Collins CA, Fitzpatrick MH, Kobylinski M,
    Bansal AB, Torretti D, Singh H. A program to provide clinicians with
    feedback on their diagnostic performance in a learning health
    system. *Jt Comm J Qual Saf* 2021;47:120--26

[^6]: See *VHA Directive 1088*, at
    va.gov/vhapublications/ViewPublication.asp?pub_ID=3148 and also the
    *Communication Of Test Results Toolkit* SharePoint site (on VA
    intranet), at
    dvagov.sharepoint.com/sites/VACOVHADUSHOM/10NC/10NC3/CTR/default.aspx

[^7]: Singh H, *et al*. Recommendations for using the Revised Safer Dx
    Instrument to help measure and improve diagnostic safety. *Diagnosis
    (Berl)*. 2019 Nov 26;6(4):315--23.

[^8]: Murphy DR, Meyer AN, Sittig DF, Meeks DW, Thomas EJ, Singh H.
    Application of electronic trigger tools to identify targets for
    improving diagnostic safety. *BMJ Qual Saf.* 2019;28(2):151.
