% PSCI DISCovery Resource Proposal
% Roni Matin, Andrew Zimolzak
% 2022-11-21

# Objective

This VA Patient Safety Center of Inquiry (PSCI) focuses on measurement
of patient safety. Prior work by the Center for Innovations in
Quality, Effectiveness and Safety (IQuESt) has been conducted to
develop a series of Safer Dx framework guided rules-based *e-triggers*
to facilitate the measurement of diagnostic errors in primary care and
emergency department settings. These e-triggers enabled the
measurement of diagnostic safety issues via electronic health record
data. The resulting set of Safer Dx e-triggers have undergone
extensive testing and refinement. This PSCI endeavor aims to implement
these e-triggers across VA facilities at a nation level. However, VA
sites' practices and data may vary so these Safer Dx e-triggers may
require customization to optimize their performance and effectiveness
when implemented into clinical practice at individual sites.

# Audience

This proposal will outline the "Diagnosis Improvement Safety Center"
(DISCovery) plan to *implement* these Safer Dx e-triggers into
practice at 3 selected VA centers. The initial phase will involve a
pilot in the primary care setting to test a Safer Dx e-trigger change
package called *Safer Dx ENGAGE*. This change packet is intended to
provide the guidance and support for the implementation of the
e-triggers to each of the sites.

# Format

The Safer Dx ENGAGE change package
uses the recommendations from the Measure Dx framework
and leverages the knowledge gained in the previous work to inform and
guide the sites with:

1. establishing the necessary project structure and resources

2. the process to identify the appropriate e-trigger(s) needed, and
the associated customization process

3. the roll out and testing of the e-triggers into practice

4. the measurement of the triggers' use and effectiveness

The project comprises two main aims. Aim 1 involves developing and
testing the Safer Dx ENGAGE change package and Aim 2 is the assessment
of the implementation and use of the triggers. Broadly, the process
will follow the *Measure Dx* Resource.[^measure]

Aim 1: Develop and pilot test a Safer Dx ENGAGE change package to
provide VA facilities guidance on how to implement e-triggers in
primary care




# Development Process

**fixme** - insert








# Proposed Contents

## Introduction/Prepare

VA Medical centers vary in their structure and organization, their
patient populations, and their operational goals. As such there may be
a need for some changes or additions to current practices at
participating centers to prepare for the implementation of the Safer
Dx e-triggers. Implementation of new measurement strategies and change
approaches must account for organizational and other non-technical
issues, or electronic tools will not lead to improvements.[^model]





## Team

Successful projects depend on buy-in from the user community of an
organization. A structured change management process outlined in the
Safer Dx ENGAGE change package has been proposed to facilitate this.
Therefore, the initial step will be to identify those interested and
invested in the project goals. These individuals may have different
existing interests or roles within the organization, but they will
need to come together to form a project team. The Safer Dx team and
the project champion will engage leadership and other stakeholders
throughout the organization, raise awareness and promote the projects
goals and tasks in order to achieve buy-in from the wider stakeholder
community. At the initiation of the project the sites need to identify
individuals who will work as an engaged Safer Dx team with dedicated
hours available towards the change package. This team at a minimum
should contain the following roles:

Project Champion:

: will be the project sponsor and engage with senior management to
report progress and provide support and strategies to the project team
to address barriers the project may encounter

Project Manager:

: provide support for core project and administrative functions as
well as project reporting to the Project Champion

Safety Officer:

: ensure the e-triggers and their implementation align with
organizational patient safety and quality standards and goals

Chart Reviewer:

: ideally with clinical training to be able to review and verify the
accuracy and completeness of the data generated by the e-triggers

Data manager, system administrator, programmers:

: facilitate access to the CDW and other organizational data
resources, as well monitor and advise on the technical aspects of the
development and implementation of the e-triggers. In addition, they will
liaise with clinical experts as part the e-trigger review activities.

Developers:

: familiar with working with databases and other data systems both for
information retrieval and customization tasks for the e-trigger as
needed. The development, testing, and implementation of the e-triggers
is an iterative process and so it is essential for the project team
work together in an integrated and cohesive way. The process may
involve multiple revisions to the e-trigger to ensure the project
meets common organizational patient safety goals and aligns to the
identified clinical objectives.

The Safer Dx ENGAGE change package contains multiple steps. The first
involves identifying key individuals within the organization, who may
be involved with this project both in terms of providing guidance and
in the development of content for the e-triggers. The following steps
involve creation of various functional groups:

### Task: Convene an expert panel

- 6-8 individuals to provide expert advice and guidance

- Should represent the areas of patient safety, diagnostic error,
  quality improvement, clinical leadership, and informatics

- Will identify individuals to participate in 3 stakeholder groups for
  the development of content

### Task: Convene stakeholder groups for development of content

Key individuals from specific disciplines should be engaged and
enrolled into 3 groups to guide and inform the development of content.
Each group should consist of 6-7 key individuals with appropriate
experience and knowledge of their field to inform the e-trigger
content development.

Data and Informatics Group:

: Chief Information Officer, Chief Medical Information Officer, Chief
Nursing Information Officer, data analysts, CDW administrators

Quality and Safety Group:

: Patient safety managers, Quality managers, Risk managers

Clinical Operations Group:

: Chief Medical Directors, Patient Experience Innovation leaders,
clinical leaders, and clinicians




## Self-Assessment

Each DISCovery site will determine its priorities and how e-triggers
could be employed to have the most impact. The *Measure Dx Checklist*
will provide a framework for this step.[^measure] Sites will select
one or more measurement strategies, and they will ensure that
sufficient resources are available for diagnostic safety measurement
activities. Sites must ensure sufficient personnel and technical
resources are available and enrolled on the project to:

1. Collect information about diagnostic safety

2. Respond effectively when learning opportunities are discovered

To aid participating facilities in assessing how ready their
organization is to initiate the project, the following checklist may
help. This checklist will aid the Safer Dx project team to identify
whee further efforts may be required to prepare for initiation of the
project.

This section *refers to Checklist,* which will be included as an
appendix.




## Strategy: Electronic Health Record-Enhanced Chart Review (ENGAGE Section 1)

Participating VA facilities may use EHR data to inform their
measurement of diagnostic safety. This approach could also be
augmented with the strategy of soliciting information about diagnostic
safety directly from clinicians.

Additionally, participating facilities could ask the following
questions:

1. Does your HCO have an EHR data warehouse or equivalent system for
   EHR queries?

2. Is there a person who can access the data warehouse and can support
   the team with EHR queries?

3. Is there a team member who understands clinical data
   quality/validation?

4. Does the HCO have a coordinated process for requesting EHR data,
   running queries, and generating reports?

Each DISCovery site should decide who within the organization is
ultimately going to receive the data, meaning who is going to take
action based on it.[^feedback] This will guide the format in which
recipients wish to receive feedback and ensure all the desired data
elements will be retrieved by the e-trigger code.

See also: VA's *Communication Of Test Results* *Toolkit*.




## Review cases (ENGAGE Section 2)

An important step in the development of any e-trigger is ensuring its
accuracy and clinical relevance. This is achieved by the verification
of the output data generated by the e-trigger. This is field testing
of the e-trigger's accuracy is multi-step process where the retrieved
data are systematically reviewed by clinically trained staff as chart
reviewers, amendments if necessary are made, and then the new version
e-trigger's output data is again reviewed by chart reviewers.

- These chart review processes will identify data quality and
  completeness issues of the e-trigger results. Chart reviewers may
  confer with the members of the Stakeholder Group 1(clinical leaders
  and clinicians) to determine whether the e-trigger meets the project
  and organizational goals or whether changes to the e-trigger are
  needed.

- This information will provide feedback to the data
  analysts/programmers responsible for developing the e-trigger so
  that they can incorporate changes to the SQL code. Clinical
  stakeholders may suggest changes to the inclusion and exclusion
  criteria to the developers, who will revise the e-trigger code

- The new revised e-trigger will be run and the same process of chart
  review to check for accuracy and clinical relevance will be repeated
  and any changes recommended will be made to the e-trigger. This
  process will be repeated until the accuracy and clinical relevance
  reach or exceed the agreed threshold.

- Once the e-trigger has been optimized and clinicians give
  confirmation of its accuracy to retrieve data identifying
  opportunities for diagnostic safety improvements. This actionable
  information will be communicated to Group2 personnel (Quality and
  safety personnel), who will need to become knowledgeable on how to
  operationalize it.

This e-trigger optimization process can be an iterative and
time-consuming but is necessary to ensure the e-trigger achieves the
desired levels of accuracy and clinical relevance. Adequate time
should be allocated in the local implementation timeline and project
plan to accommodate for this. Individual sites will determine how many
cases they have the capacity to review as part of their validation
review process.

The PSCI IQuESt team have performed this process in other VAMCs, and
the accuracy or clinical relevance of e-triggers varies from site to
site. As outlined earlier, the DISCovery sites will decide *who* will
review cases, the chart review members of the Safer Dx project team.
Additionally, the data managers and programmers need to be familiar
with individual reviewers, as well as the means to send cases for
review. It is therefore essential to a smooth e-trigger validation
process that these members of the team communicate and work together
in a cohesive and integrated way. Lastly, the *Revised Safer Dx
Instrument*[^revised] will be central to determining the presence/absence
of missed opportunities for diagnosis.




## Assess implementation (ENGAGE Sections 3-4)

### Data Dissemination and Support

The results retrieved from the e-trigger may be in a format that is
not conducive to interpretation by personnel from diverse backgrounds.
To maximize utilization of the results obtained, this stage of the
project will focus on improving user interfaces of the tools used to
display the data Engagement with the Informatics personnel will
support the efforts to operationalize the dissemination of the
e-trigger results. Participants will analyze and communicate the
retrieved data by way of graphs, reports, interactive dashboards with
drill down capabilities and as well as other enhanced data
visualization mechanisms.

In addition to data display of the results obtained, the Informatics
group will support the sustainability of the e-triggers by being
closely involved in the enhancement of the queries. Participants will
work on standardized data definitions, analytic approaches, and
methods to display and communicate the results retrieved by the
e-triggers. This documentation process for the e-trigger queries and
other associated technical requirements will enable future
enhancements as necessitated by changes in the organizational
operations.

### Developing Strategies to Learn from the Project

Site stakeholders should review
and determine how the process was used for (1) analysis, (2) feedback,
and (3) learning. Project completion/debriefing meetings may be held
to gather feedback from stakeholders, primarily Group3 Clinical
leaders, and clinicians, but also from the wider stakeholder
community. In other words, was *Safer Dx ENGAGE* appropriate for the
task, given the interviews we did at your facility to develop it?

The aim of this step is to recommend ways that users can choose a
diagnostic safety target considering organization priorities,
available resources, and availability of data relevant to the team's
goal.




[^measure]: Bradford A, Singh H. Measure Dx: A Resource To Identify,
Analyze, and Learn From Diagnostic Safety Events. AHRQ Publication
22-0030. May 2022.

[^model]: Sittig DF, Singh H. A new sociotechnical model for studying
health information technology in complex adaptive healthcare systems.
*Quality and Safety in Health Care*. 2010;19(Suppl 3):i68--i74.

[^feedback]: Meyer AND, Upadhyay DK, Collins CA, Fitzpatrick MH,
Kobylinski M, Bansal AB, Torretti D, Singh H. A program to provide
clinicians with feedback on their diagnostic performance in a learning
health system. *Jt Comm J Qual Saf* 2021;47:120--26

[^revised]: Singh H, Khanna A, Spitzmueller C, Meyer AND. Recommendations
for using the Revised Safer Dx Instrument to help measure and improve
diagnostic safety. *Diagnosis (Berl)*. 2019 Nov 26;6(4):315--23.
